Dear Ben

I hope this email finds you well!

I am reaching out to share some news and also because I wanted to ask for your advice on drought predictions.

A colleague and I were recently selected to test machine learning approaches to drought prediciton using the Copernicus Data Store data as part of the ECMWF Summer of Weather Code Project (https://github.com/esowc). It is an initiative to work on weather related code for the summer with ECMWF support. Our proposal focused on building an experimental pipeline to preprocess and prepare ERA5 data to then test multiple algorithms and definitions of drought and try and find sources of predictability.

Our implementation will be open source on this repository (https://github.com/esowc/ml_drought).

I wanted to share our current approach and wondered if you would be able to share any thoughts you might have about this approach.

We were thinking that in East Africa (we will initially look at Kenya because it has a neat seasonal cycle and fits nicely in a box), agricultural impacts of drought are particularly important. I have spoken with people (https://www.forpac.org/) who work with decision makers in the region (http://www.icpac.net/) about what they see as important. Something that the National Drought Management Authority (https://www.ndma.go.ke/) see as particularly useful is an end of season vegetation health metric, so that they can determine whether the season is likely to be successful or not. So our target variable will be end-of-season VCI (vegetation condition index). Our predictors will include conditions in the preceding months (precip, evaporation, soil moisture, temperature etc.). The idea will be to learn the relationship between these variables and then test how good our predictions are when driven with SEAS5 forecast data, so combining statistical/ML approaches with physically based forecasts.

The MAM ('Long Rains') season is notoriously unpredictable and forecasts initialised in February don't do very well for March, April or May. Those initialised once the season has started in March do better. A second approach would be to try and identify teleconnections / correlations with global SSTs / atmospheric anomalies at different lags. Here I was thinking the target variable would be precipitation and the predictors would include U, V, SSTs, SLP, divergence etc. I was wondering if you had any other ideas for variables that might be worth including in this calculation.

I know that's alot of information - sorry about that. I just thought that it would be great to share with you and also let you know about the Summer of Code project because it will mean I will be in Reading for a time!

Thanks again for your time

Kind Regards
Tommy
